README.md, before:

# EECA Python Template

![ci-and-deploy](https://github.com/EECA-NZ/eeca-python-template/actions/workflows/ci-and-deploy.yml/badge.svg)
[Test Coverage Report](https://eeca-nz.github.io/eeca-python-template)

This repository serves as a template for Python projects at EECA, including pre-configured GitHub Actions workflows for linting and testing.

## Features
*   **Code Formatting:** Enforces consistent code style with Black and Isort.
*   **Linting:** Analyzes code quality using Pylint.
*   **Dependency Auditing:** Uses pip-audit to detect known vulnerabilities in the Python dependencies.
*   **Testing:** Runs tests using Pytest and reports coverage with Coverage.py.
*   **Pre-commit Hooks:** Automates code formatting, linting, and dependency auditing before commits and pushes.
*   **Continuous Integration:** GitHub Actions workflows automate linting, testing, and dependency auditing on each push and pull request.
*   **Dependabot for Automated Updates:** A `.github/dependabot.yml` file keeps Python dependencies and GitHub Action versions updated.

## How to Use
It is assumed that the developer is working in Ubuntu (typically within `wsl` on an EECA laptop).

1.  **Use the Template:**
    *   Click on "Use this template" on the GitHub repository page.
    *   Create a new repository using this template.

2.  **Clone the Repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone git@github.com:<gituser>/<new_repo_name>.git
    ```

3.  **Update Project Metadata:**
    *   Update `pyproject.toml` and, if necessary, add a `setup.py` with your project's details.

4.  **Create and Activate a Virtual Environment:**
    In Ubuntu or WSL:
    ```bash
    python -m venv .venv
    source ./.venv/bin/activate
    ```
    In PowerShell (Windows):
    ```bash
    python -m venv .venv
    .\.venv\Scripts\activate
    ```
    Ensure your virtual environment is activated before running the commands below.

5.  **Install Required Dependencies:**
    ```bash
    python -m pip install --upgrade pip
    python -m pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
    ```

6.  **Install Pre-commit Hooks:**
    ```bash
    pre-commit install --install-hooks
    pre-commit install --hook-type commit-msg
    pre-commit install --hook-type pre-push
    ```

    This installs Git hooks specified in `.pre-commit-config.yaml`:
    *   On **commit**, fast checks (`black`, `isort`, `pylint` on staged files) are run.
    *   On **push**, thorough checks (`pip-audit`) are run.

7.  **Start Developing:**
    *   Develop your Python package in the `src/` directory.
    *   Write tests in the `tests/` directory.

8.  **Running Tests Locally:**
    ```bash
    python -m pytest
    ```

9. **Run the tests locally with coverage:**
    ```bash
    python -m coverage run -m pytest
    python -m coverage report
    python -m coverage html
    ```

11. **Running Linters and Formatters Locally:**
    *   Black and Isort:
        ```bash
        python -m black $(git ls-files "*.py")
        python -m isort $(git ls-files "*.py")
        ```
    *   Full Codebase Pylint (run manually if desired):
        ```bash
        pylint --disable=R0801 $(git ls-files "*.py")
        ```
    *   Pip-Audit:
        ```bash
        pip-audit
        ```

12. **Ensure Code Quality Before Pushing:**
    *   Ensure all tests pass and code adheres to style guidelines.
    *   Fix any reported vulnerabilities found by `pip-audit`.
    *   Run `pre-commit run --all-files` to ensure all existing files conform to the hooks.


## Viewing Coverage Reports on GitHub Pages

This repository publishes coverage reports using Coverage.py during GitHub Actions.
The HTML report is uploaded as a Pages artifact and deployed with the `actions/deploy-pages` action.

### Enable GitHub Pages

1. Go to **Settings -> Pages**.
2. Under **Build and deploy**, set **Source** to **GitHub Actions**.
3. Push to `main` or `dev` and wait for the workflow to finish. The deploy job will output the site URL.

### Coverage report URL

Your coverage site will be available at:
```
https://eeca-nz.github.io/eeca-python-template/
```

### Note that:

*   It may take a few minutes for GitHub Pages to become active.
*   The coverage report is updated each time tests are run in GitHub Actions.

## Notes on Pre-commit:
*   **Configuration:** The `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file defines the pre-commit and pre-push hooks.
*   **Hooks Behavior:**

    *   Before running any checks, the hooks verify that the `.venv` virtual environment is activated. This ensures that the correct versions of tools and dependencies are used.
    *   On commit:
        *   Runs **Black**, **Isort**, and **Pylint (staged files only)**.
    *   On push:
        *   Runs **pip-audit** to check for security vulnerabilities before code is pushed.

*   **Automatic Formatting and Checking:**
    If any formatter modifies files or a check fails, the commit will be blocked. After fixing issues or adding modified files, commit again.

*   **Conventional Commits:**
    The pre-commit hooks will enforce commit message conventions. To find out more visit [www.conventionalcommits.org](https://www.conventionalcommits.org)

    Common commit types:
    - `feat`: new feature
    - `fix`: bug fix
    - `docs`: documentation only changes
    - `style`: formatting only (no code changes)
    - `refactor`: code change that neither fixes a bug nor adds a feature
    - `test`: adding or fixing tests
    - `chore`: maintenance tasks (build, deps, configs, etc.)

    Example:  
    - `feat(auth): add salesforce login`  
    - `fix(python): correct null values in code`  

## Fixing Old Commits (Conventional Commits)
If your commit messages don’t follow the convention and checks fail, you can rewrite them using interactive rebase.

1.Configure VS Code as your Git editor *(Skip this if you already use another editor)*
```bash
git config --global core.editor "code -w"
```
2.Abort any in-progress rebase (just in case)
```bash
git rebase --abort || true
```
3.Switch to your feature branch and update
```bash
git switch your-feature
git fetch origin
```
4.Pick the correct base branch (choose ONE)
```bash
BASE=origin/main   # if your PR targets main
# BASE=origin/dev  # if your PR targets dev
# BASE=origin/test  # if your PR targets test
```
5.Find the fork point (where your branch split from base)
```bash
FORK_POINT=$(git merge-base "$BASE" HEAD)
```
6.Start interactive rebase
```bash
git rebase -i "$FORK_POINT"
# change 'pick' to 'reword' for the commits to fix
# enter proper Conventional Commit messages when 
```
7.Push rewritten history safely
```bash
git push --force-with-lease
```
Note: This rewrites commit history. Only do this on your own feature branches, never on shared `main`/`dev`.

*   **Skipping Hooks (not recommended):**
    ```bash
    git commit --no-verify
    ```

    Use only when necessary, e.g., for urgent hotfixes.

Commit message:

docs(readme): update README with semantic_versioning usage instructions

README.md, after:

# EECA Python Template

![ci-and-deploy](https://github.com/EECA-NZ/eeca-python-template/actions/workflows/ci-and-deploy.yml/badge.svg)
[Test Coverage Report](https://eeca-nz.github.io/eeca-python-template)

This repository serves as a template for Python projects at EECA, including pre-configured GitHub Actions workflows for linting and testing.

## Features
*   **Code Formatting:** Enforces consistent code style with Black and Isort.
*   **Linting:** Analyzes code quality using Pylint.
*   **Dependency Auditing:** Uses pip-audit to detect known vulnerabilities in the Python dependencies.
*   **Testing:** Runs tests using Pytest and reports coverage with Coverage.py.
*   **Pre-commit Hooks:** Automates code formatting, linting, and dependency auditing before commits and pushes.
*   **Continuous Integration:** GitHub Actions workflows automate linting, testing, and dependency auditing on each push and pull request.
*   **Dependabot for Automated Updates:** A `.github/dependabot.yml` file keeps Python dependencies and GitHub Action versions updated.

## How to Use
It is assumed that the developer is working in Ubuntu (typically within `wsl` on an EECA laptop).

1.  **Use the Template:**
    *   Click on "Use this template" on the GitHub repository page.
    *   Create a new repository using this template.

2.  **Clone the Repository:**
    ```bash
    git clone git@github.com:<gituser>/<new_repo_name>.git
    ```

3.  **Update Project Metadata:**
    *   Update `pyproject.toml` and, if necessary, add a `setup.py` with your project's details.

4.  **Create and Activate a Virtual Environment:**
    In Ubuntu or WSL:
    ```bash
    python -m venv .venv
    source ./.venv/bin/activate
    ```
    In PowerShell (Windows):
    ```bash
    python -m venv .venv
    .\.venv\Scripts\activate
    ```
    Ensure your virtual environment is activated before running the commands below.

5.  **Install Required Dependencies:**
    ```bash
    python -m pip install --upgrade pip
    python -m pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
    ```

6.  **Install Pre-commit Hooks:**
    ```bash
    pre-commit install --install-hooks
    pre-commit install --hook-type commit-msg
    pre-commit install --hook-type pre-push
    ```

    This installs Git hooks specified in `.pre-commit-config.yaml`:
    *   On **commit**, fast checks (`black`, `isort`, `pylint` on staged files) are run.
    *   On **push**, thorough checks (`pip-audit`) are run.

7.  **Start Developing:**
    *   Develop your Python package in the `src/` directory.
    *   Write tests in the `tests/` directory.

8.  **Running Tests Locally:**
    ```bash
    python -m pytest
    ```

9. **Run the tests locally with coverage:**
    ```bash
    python -m coverage run -m pytest
    python -m coverage report
    python -m coverage html
    ```

11. **Running Linters and Formatters Locally:**
    *   Black and Isort:
        ```bash
        python -m black $(git ls-files "*.py")
        python -m isort $(git ls-files "*.py")
        ```
    *   Full Codebase Pylint (run manually if desired):
        ```bash
        pylint --disable=R0801 $(git ls-files "*.py")
        ```
    *   Pip-Audit:
        ```bash
        pip-audit
        ```

12. **Ensure Code Quality Before Pushing:**
    *   Ensure all tests pass and code adheres to style guidelines.
    *   Fix any reported vulnerabilities found by `pip-audit`.
    *   Run `pre-commit run --all-files` to ensure all existing files conform to the hooks.


## Viewing Coverage Reports on GitHub Pages

This repository publishes coverage reports using Coverage.py during GitHub Actions.
The HTML report is uploaded as a Pages artifact and deployed with the `actions/deploy-pages` action.

### Enable GitHub Pages

1. Go to **Settings -> Pages**.
2. Under **Build and deploy**, set **Source** to **GitHub Actions**.
3. Push to `main` or `dev` and wait for the workflow to finish. The deploy job will output the site URL.

### Coverage report URL

Your coverage site will be available at:
```
https://eeca-nz.github.io/eeca-python-template/
```

### Note that:

*   It may take a few minutes for GitHub Pages to become active.
*   The coverage report is updated each time tests are run in GitHub Actions.

## Notes on Pre-commit:
*   **Configuration:** The `.pre-commit-config.yaml` file defines the pre-commit and pre-push hooks.
*   **Hooks Behavior:**

    *   Before running any checks, the hooks verify that the `.venv` virtual environment is activated. This ensures that the correct versions of tools and dependencies are used.
    *   On commit:
        *   Runs **Black**, **Isort**, and **Pylint (staged files only)**.
    *   On push:
        *   Runs **pip-audit** to check for security vulnerabilities before code is pushed.

*   **Automatic Formatting and Checking:**
    If any formatter modifies files or a check fails, the commit will be blocked. After fixing issues or adding modified files, commit again.

*   **Conventional Commits:**
    The pre-commit hooks will enforce commit message conventions. To find out more visit [www.conventionalcommits.org](https://www.conventionalcommits.org)

    Common commit types:
    - `feat`: new feature
    - `fix`: bug fix
    - `docs`: documentation only changes
    - `style`: formatting only (no code changes)
    - `refactor`: code change that neither fixes a bug nor adds a feature
    - `test`: adding or fixing tests
    - `chore`: maintenance tasks (build, deps, configs, etc.)

    Example:  
    - `feat(auth): add salesforce login`  
    - `fix(python): correct null values in code`  

*   **Semantic Versioning:**
    This project follows Semantic Versioning (SemVer). Versions are expressed as:`MAJOR.MINOR.PATCH`.
    When releases are created, the commit history is used to generate release notes and determine the next version automatically.
    - `feat:` → MINOR bump (1.2.0 → 1.3.0)
    - `fix:` → PATCH bump (1.2.0 → 1.2.1)
    - `feat!:` or `BREAKING CHANGE:` → MAJOR bump (1.2.0 → 2.0.0)
    - Other types → no release unless paired with `BREAKING CHANGE:`

## Fixing Old Commits (Conventional Commits)
If your commit messages don’t follow the convention and checks fail, you can rewrite them using interactive rebase.

1.Configure VS Code as your Git editor *(Skip this if you already use another editor)*
```bash
git config --global core.editor "code -w"
```
2.Abort any in-progress rebase (just in case)
```bash
git rebase --abort || true
```
3.Switch to your feature branch and update
```bash
git switch your-feature
git fetch origin
```
4.Pick the correct base branch (choose ONE)
```bash
BASE=origin/main   # if your PR targets main
# BASE=origin/dev  # if your PR targets dev
# BASE=origin/test  # if your PR targets test
```
5.Find the fork point (where your branch split from base)
```bash
FORK_POINT=$(git merge-base "$BASE" HEAD)
```
6.Start interactive rebase
```bash
git rebase -i "$FORK_POINT"
# change 'pick' to 'reword' for the commits to fix
# enter proper Conventional Commit messages when 
```
7.Push rewritten history safely
```bash
git push --force-with-lease
```
Note: This rewrites commit history. Only do this on your own feature branches, never on shared `main`/`dev`.

*   **Skipping Hooks (not recommended):**
    ```bash
    git commit --no-verify
    ```

    Use only when necessary, e.g., for urgent hotfixes.
